When I got pregnant, Chernobyl happened.
And suddenly I had to think about what I'm going to eat now.
The genes are there, they are just the ammunition used to load some kind of weapon,
but the trigger is the way of life.
It didn't take long for scientists to show that those regions
of our genome that do not code for some proteins
are strongly modulated by lifestyle, thinking, and
everything that surrounds us.
And that's how the term epigenetics came to be.
Today we know that a person eats 30 to 50 tons of food in his life.
To lose one kilogram of fat by walking,
you can walk 212 kilometers.
In some people, simply when you apply
intestinal microbiome transplantation,
healing is over 96%.
You get everything you need in that one grocery.
And you know what the best super food is?
Hello everyone, welcome to another
LOOD podcast.
At the time of recording this episode, we improved a bit,
here's 79% of all of you who haven't followed the YouTube channel lud podcast,
but if you are among those who have, I want to thank you this way.
Why am I inviting you to subscribe?
Because the number of subscribers is a metric that is very important to me
for negotiations with future guests,
and also for negotiations with sponsors
and all other collaborators of the LOOD brand.
In today's episode, I am joined, and you,
that is, you, by professor, Doctor of Science Donatella Verbanac,
professor at the Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry of the University of Zagreb,
graduated in medical biochemistry in 1984,
and received her doctorate in biochemical sciences in 1993.
in 1993 at the University of Zagreb.
Professor Verbanac is an expert in the field of biochemistry,
drug research and intestinal microbiome
with a rich contribution to educational research.
She is the author of many scientific papers and books
devoted to the advancement of knowledge, the impact of nutrition on health.
Well, greetings, Donatella.
Hello, I'm very happy to be with you there, that is, with you,
this whole adventure.
I see the adventure as a great success
in my professional career.
Oh, that. When he comes...
Today we talked a little bit in the morning,
so I tried to tell you something 50 times,
and in those 50 times I think I told you 25 or 30 times.
She somehow comes to me out of respect.
It's kind of natural for me to say you,
but I'm going to force myself, because the atmosphere is somehow more intimate
when I say you anyway.
So I hope that no one will feel edited.
It's not a problem for me.
For my viewers, or could you say maybe
who is Donatella Verbanac?
A little more than what I said.
Very simple, we won't take too long.
We are actually concentrating on the professional part.
Everything was said correctly. I graduated from medical biochemistry,
pharmaceutical biochemistry faculty.
And I immediately started working in a clinical hospital for infectious diseases,
actually in Zagreb on Mihaljevac, in an infectious disease hospital.
That was my internship. I enjoyed my whole time there.
It was very nice, challenging. I am interested in things that are new,
that I would have liked to know very well. AIDS also appeared
in Croatia at that time. So I was like an intern, let's say, in a laboratory.
On a lot of experiences that I could not have expected. By the way, it seemed to me
as if I had graduated from another university. However, I could not stay in Zagreb.
There was no work. In other words, there was work, but not attractive enough,
or financially, the work did not allow me to afford an apartment
and all other things. It was the 80s. And a position opened up in Rijeka.
I also went to work at the medical school.
In Rijeka. Just as interesting, new. I didn't think that I would ever end up
at the medical school, still in education. But I accepted it with joy.
It was very nice. I actually started living there.
And then my little son came, at the age of 86. I continued, of course,
to study science, because I had already enrolled in a master's degree in Zagreb.
I defended my master's degree in 1990 at PMF. And then she got a scholarship to do a doctorate.
Upbeat again. You mean, Trieste is not far. I am doing a doctorate in Trieste. I live in Rijeka, on Krk.
That is, in Njivice. It's not far. I'm fine. And war happens.
And that was a slightly more difficult period. Everything was more difficult to organize because my husband was also actively invited.
Because he worked in such a place that he had to protect the company and everything else. Worked in Dina at that time to prevent some kind of disaster, hazard.
And I managed to really do that work. It was of good quality. I defended my defense in Zagreb at the university.
Svomatic and excellent. After that, a second child, then a postdoc and then a sudden return to Zagreb, because swimming is calling me, the mradica came.
And what? I worked in the pharmaceutical industry for ten years. Then again, the pharmaceutical industry should transfer the group to one of the faculties for medicine specifically.
I took on the responsibility of transferring these people to medicine. That we will work together. They are fantastic experts. Young people with whom I started my career in the industry. They were trainees some of them at that time.
Some worked only a little. And there we started to study some things like this related to translational sciences.
What would be translational sciences?
It's interesting that people always think it's a translation, when in fact it's a transfer of knowledge from the laboratory to the patient and back. Otherwise it is called bench to bedside. So from the bench in the lab, he looks at the patient and listens to what the doctor says.
And then you, as a basic scientist, do what is necessary to discover new medicines as soon as possible. And that was a very interesting area because Croatia reacted very quickly after America in Europe in general. All of this happened sometime in the mid-2000s because they saw that the pharmaceutical industry simply started to dissipate from one half.
Reduce the genome, the sequence was known, but from one half they saw that we do not have 230,000 functional genes but only 23,000 functional genes. There was a period and it was really low low, low low output, that is, low low release of medicines to the market. And then the initiative from America started, we need to start talking more so that people can socialize with each other, understand each other, create mixed bodies.
Let's create mixed teams, start working so that basic scientists communicate with hazelnuts, hazelnuts with basic scientists, and so there were projects that were well financed, we jumped into it.
Here we are now, you mentioned the genome, or something?
Yes, yes, the human genome.
How humane?
Human, human genome, yes.
Does that genome have anything to do with genetics and epigenetics that we commented on?
That's right, yes, yes.
Earlier today?
That.
What I somehow, I'm a lover of that personal development, let's say I call it that.
That. And the older I get, the more skeptical I am about how much we can actually change.
So we can.
And I started more, which is absurd, I do a podcast about it so I listen to different people and question myself.
I see that I have changed throughout my life, I definitely have, but I still believe that there is some kind of core of me that is constant.
Somehow I also heard from my parents that it's your genetics, or now in society when you listen to the people around you, everyone tells you it's genetics,
that genetics is more than 50%, 60% of our life results and so on.
You had a different opinion, can you tell us a little more about that epigenetics?
And what exactly is epigenetics?
Maybe molecular biologists are invited to talk about it, but I learned a lot of such things from them
and I worked with people who were really experts in molecular biology and microbiology.
And what we really found out with the discovery of the human genome is that we really only have 23,000 functional genes,
maybe this is such an abstract number when I say it to someone who is not in that field,
but the point is that we are not very different from others, especially mammals of all kinds.
And that was a disappointment for the pharmaceutical industry, it means that you can't create some new potential targets
so you can treat some diseases outside of what is given there.
However, this would also mean that a large part of our nucleic acid, those beautiful double strands of DNA,
are not functional genes.
And at that time there was just one, I would say slightly overbearing opinion that a large part of DNA is essentially junk.
I won't even say that word in Croatian because I simply don't like treating nature like that.
Because everything created in nature really exists with logic.
It didn't take long for scientists to show that those regions on our
genome that do not code for some proteins, mean proteins that do the work,
proteins are the first, they do the work, they are still regulatory regions and that they are highly modulated by lifestyle,
thinking, everything that surrounds us, and that's how the term epigenetics became,
something besides genetics, what really determines a person. Genes are there, they say, they are just the ammunition used to
load some kind of weapon, and the lock is a way of life. You can carry a gene that is mutated and never get sick from a disease,
and you can also look completely healthy and get sick again. And these are studies that are very well documented
and very well founded, they were conducted by experts studying numerous twins, large studies on twins were done,
it was not known from them actually those twin studies conducted by Professor Tim Spector from King's College in London.
Nowadays, he deals much more with microbiota and epigenetics and their impact on our daily life and on the health of the microbiome,
but he started with twins, meaning he followed them for decades and saw that the answer could be completely different. In the middle of the year 2000, we still did not know well,
we did not know well the microbiome, we did not know well the bacteria that are on the mucous membrane of our intestine or the microorganisms,
but with the development of technology that helped the development of the human genome, we used it to deduce what types of bacteria,
that is, which are the phyla or individual populations of bacteria that attack our mucous membranes. Because these are all bacteria that cannot be cultivated otherwise.
They are anaerobes and you can only detect them with such high technologies. And when they started looking for it, then a completely new area opened up, then there was an explosion.
In this sense, it still continues to this day, that is, for the last 15 years. I would say maybe even less, ten, fifteen years, yes.
Some kind of ingrained opinion, I don't know, you are born with some...
In advance received set or package of genes, some qualities, character or what do I know. I ask myself that question often. What we come with, or I noticed it in myself, I notice it in close people around me, that there is still some constant in our, I don't know, what is the right word, whether it is temperament, whether it is character, whether it is spirit, does...
Is there something in every person that is constant? I don't know, would you perhaps just agree or not?
There is a. And I like that one Latin word. I don't know if you've heard of it or if you're familiar with it, but they call it a quid. Bit, quid or just quid, when you put quid.
And what is a quid? I do not know.
You can't say soul, because that's a broader term than that. But I liked that notion.
Quid, here, since you're guarding her. I've never heard of this. Because thank you for that.
We often referred to this while working in the lab.
That?
Everyone has their quid.
Everyone has their quid, yes, agree.
That.
How come you decided on a scientific career in the first place? What drew you to that direction?
I didn't really have any big choices in my life, but I followed what was offered to me.
In other words, what turned out to be spaces opening up for me along the way.
I've never been, it's really true, closed to new challenges.
That curiosity of mine was always present.
Even in high school, I experimented a little and went to those competitions in chemistry and physics.
I always liked that.
Maybe I was more of that.
The desire to travel, to change the environment a little.
And then, at that time, competitions were held in Priština, in Novi Sad.
It was all exotic.
You are now going there from Istria.
You go everywhere because whoever is going, you are happy to be on the bus, to have a suitcase with you.
So that I also discovered that science and the science that I discovered,
which is more science in the sense of scientific research, and not the science of application
within the laboratory, for which I was actually educated the most,
I discovered myself in Rijeka, working with physiologists, monologists,
helping to them as a biochemist and working as part of biochemical educational content
with students on their works.
It was great for me too, at least with the animals.
I learned a lot.
No problem at all around me when she was in the lab doing her thing.
Because your time goes by very quickly.
Even when I was alone and when I was, I really had that homesickness,
wherever I went or the child was the same as mine growing up and sometimes the child is with you,
but then your productivity is very low.
But if the child is not with you, you are in some kind of great misery when your child is not next to you,
maybe it's not next to you, but when you enter the lab, everything disappears.
And it's a nice job.
It's not a job for everyone, because there are a lot of sacrifices.
In that sense, I won't say that it's difficult,
but giving up some things that you can't afford.
If you are dedicated to doing something, the experiment takes so many hours, you have to do it.
Why was I attracted to it?
Because it was not difficult for me to do it, I was interested in that result.
I've always been interested in that.
That's why it was nice for me to work in the pharmaceutical industry as well.
Because we really were a team, we worked well.
At the post-doc when I worked on aging phenomena in Ancona,
I had the opportunity to work with mice who were old,
as if you were observing a man or people who were 130-140 years old,
because they had such a stable.
And that was excellent.
Excellent.
If that interests you.
I was interested because it was offered to me.
I am saying that I myself have been in such areas,
so my scientific opus is not in one direction,
because I was constantly doing the same thing.
I would say that the common determinant of everything is biochemistry,
but there are many sub-categories within it.
If you wanted to single out one thing as the most important thing you've learned
throughout your scientific career, what would it be?
Well, the most important thing,
what I think when everything is stripped down and laid bare,
is that you simply have to be humble enough in yourself,
and I won't brag now that you are modest,
humble and simply respect that enormous knowledge
that still lies unexplored.
And we, in fact, at one point today,
I mentioned to you that we do not know
our science only as the tip of the iceberg.
We have a size outside that great sea
that is smaller than the head of a pin.
We really the more you learn, the more things you see that you don't know,
but in the end what I learned is that great discoveries are
usually very simple.
Although you can explain them in a simple way,
it is good science.
It's simple science to me.
I agree, absolutely.
What to get to that simple is very complex actually and complicated obviously.
What would you say, what is perhaps the biggest challenge you have faced during your scientific career?
Professional and life.
It can be both.
Me to myself.
I mean, the biggest challenge is always in my head.
Those are the problems you have in your head.
Basically, very few of them are real.
And that is the biggest problem.
So, how to control your thoughts, how to be focused,
how not to allow yourself to indulge yourself,
how not to allow yourself to say yes every time.
To be rational also in the sense that you are
not drawn too much by that curious, curiosity, because in the end you can just burn out
and touch, bang your head against the wall, isn't that necessary.
Those are the biggest challenges.
Everything else is okay.
As long as you are healthy, everything can work.
But for me it is the biggest.
Doing something when you are healthy is just a matter of time.
You have the intention to do that, to finish that research,
to wrap it up in some work.
It is done.
Will there be tijan before a month,
a month before, make it.
But when you're sick, everything stops.
Therefore...
I really liked this statement.
The biggest challenges in the head.
I argue with that.
How did you practically, if you already had enough
self-awareness to realize
that the biggest challenges were in your head,
how did you practically work with yourself,
work with that challenge?
How did you realize that?
Or how did you change your attitude maybe?
Me means that I have evolved
into myself, into a better person towards myself,
as my age actually grew,
that is, as my experience at work
or experience in interacting with people grew, etc.
And when I now say responsibly , I
would not was going back,
it's not because I'm striving, I don't know,
I want false modesty
or fishing for the compliment that
I look quite good for my age.
No, no, no, no. That experience you
gather throughout your life
helps you deal with it.
Because you actually realize that you are yourself
and the biggest problem just when you bang your head against the wall.
And after that, you have to reset yourself a bit,
just like the computer.
This is very interesting.
The biggest problem is actually yourself
and when you realize that and when you realize that,
and when you learn to be kind or kind to yourself,
then obviously things have to change.
Obviously somewhere different than through experience
and trial and error.
Yes, and listen.
Simply listening and observing people
who are even more experienced than you.
I am very happy when I can hang out with people
who are even more experienced than me.
I learn a lot from them.
It's simple instructions about life that...
I'm so happy to be able to hear it from someone more
experienced than me.
You should actually learn from them.
And that is what I would say to our younger generations
and what I tell my son and what I tell my daughter, of course.
Try and try when you are in the company of people who are more experienced than you,
to simply keep quiet, observe and listen.
And it's a great experience that can help you solve a lot of things.
Why repeat mistakes if others have gone through them before you
and just tell you: "Let it go". Let it go.
Somehow when you bang your head against the wall, this will learn it sooner.
Kind of like when someone else tells you to bang your head against the wall.
But many who bang their heads against the wall never reset.
It doesn't have to come to that.
I agree with that, too.
That.
When we mentioned epigenetics at the beginning, you actually said that
in that context lifestyle is very important. How we choose to live.
What did you learn about that lifestyle?
What is its role and which parts of the lifestyle are the most important, for example,
for overall human health?
It doesn't have to be just health.
In the morning we touched on it, we said that there is a better word than holistic.
Comprehensive.
That.
What is included in this lifestyle and is essential for the comprehensive health and well-being of a person?
Believe it or not, I remember myself as a student that I...
And we ate for the first two years until I moved to some kind of condition, where I had the conditions to cook myself,
that we ate mostly in the study canteens.
And since it was the early eighties, we didn't have much choice there.
Those were years of great scarcity.
And then we mostly ate, I know exactly, tomato soup, mashed potatoes and some kind of chicken.
I buy a salad and that's it.
It was mostly a permanent menu.
I also remember myself once.
I had some exercises on my rib.
I was already in the third, fourth year already.
I tell myself I'm lucky that I don't have to go to the canteen again, that I can cook at home.
Your minimalist things, it doesn't matter what they are.
Because she would surely get some chronic disease.
Or this or that or whatever.
In the end, I had some kind of ulcer on the 12 third.
They found that for me later when I worked at the hospital.
Obviously, it was the same consequence of everything.
But as a student, I didn't just study and everything.
I had a really, really great need to be outside all the time, to go out, to socialize.
And there was everything there.
It was not such an orderly life, no sleep, no sleep, etc.
However, when I became pregnant and found out that I was pregnant,
the day after that or the day after that, Chernobyl happened.
1986.
And suddenly I had to think about what I was going to do now.
Everything was polluted.
Me too, you just have to start thinking about it.
All my colleagues who lived
or raised families at that time, in our time, family was initiated a little earlier than today.
We have started keeping track of what we eat.
And I studied chemistry very well, nutrition at university was excellent.
I loved it, I loved cooking, I always loved cooking, working in Istria always revolves around the table.
A table and a bed, those are the two things that are most important to you.
That you sleep well and that you have good things to eat.
I also started collecting everything.
Books around you, everything.
And only because I can prepare myself, that is, so that my child growing inside me is healthy.
And somehow, at that time, I became most interested in biochemistry, nutrition, or metabolism.
Because food is the basic substance that you ingest and that determines how your body will be.
You can greatly modulate your body with food.
And the activity will be in some sports.
You start training, you start eating larger amounts of protein and complex carbohydrates.
In six months, you will look significantly different than you do now.
And we are the result of what we have eaten.
So, in that sense, I really started to look at what, how, after a small child.
See to it that everything is as it should be.
That I eat well, that I breathe relatively well, that I take care that I eat well.
To be careful how I breathe oxygen where it is needed to break down that food.
And besides, it is not a negligible fact.
Today we know that a person eats 30 to 50 tons of food during his life.
During 70 years. Well, that's not a little.
And on the other hand, our digestive tract is 8 to 10 meters long, they say.
Because the surface of these mucous membranes is like two tennis courts.
So it is the contact of my body with the external system next to the skin.
Direct contact.
And I think that it is very important for life forces.
What you eat, when you eat, how you eat.
And the way in which you conceive daily activities that would include relatively conscious breathing at least a couple of times.
During the morning, during the evening.
Before going to rest.
This breathing can be very modulated.
A colleague asked us the other day how I can immediately get rid of my current stress.
By breathing.
Inhaling and a couple of regular inhalations and exhalations are enough and this can influence you to calm down instantly.
Because no one knew that you still have a rush of adrenaline that normally has to be released.
Because you are under stress, but your adrenaline was released just because you are now catching an animal or running away from it.
Because we are primordial people in essence.
And you can't do that.
It circulates and releases glucose, creates compounds that then become fats and accumulate on our arteries.
Now, a student who is under stress when I am examining him cannot beat me up or run around the desk or run around the college.
It has to sit in place.
Maybe I would like you too.
I do not believe.
But anyway.
People are under stress as soon as they have a press.
So that's one thing.
Breathing, food, walking.
She would have said swimming before.
I went to the pool, now I go a little less than before.
Cycling, of course.
Stuff like that.
That's what...
That moderate physical activity.
Someone says, "It's complicated. It's a heavy myth. It's not enough to walk.
Walk, take the tram. Use your legs."
I find that helps me a lot.
Let's start with the food.
From nutrition.
I am more and more confused every day.
Not that the situation regarding nutrition is any clearer to me.
Because with today's dynamics of these social networks and various experts,
some who are nutritionists, some who are self-taught
experts, we see a lot of extremes.
Someone talks about a carnivore diet where only meat is eaten.
Someone is talking about vegetarian. Someone is talking about vegan.
Someone is talking about fasting. Someone talks about intermittent fasting.
Someone is talking about a multi-day fast.
Someone says that fat is healthy. Someone says that fat is unhealthy.
There are as many opposing opinions and attitudes as you want.
What is your opinion on what a healthy diet is?
I never liked the term healthy diet.
For me, it can be a proper diet for a person,
depending on his age, the state of his body, the activities he is engaged in at that moment.
This can be called proper nutrition. What we call healthy or unhealthy diet,
but now you list 4-5 things that you would call a 100% unhealthy diet.
Just imagine them. We can throw them there too. Come on.
So, unhealthy diet, bad foods, I would say sugar and sweets first.
I would say something highly processed like some potato chips.
Good.
I would say some kind of fast food like a hamburger.
Hamburgers. Wow, luxury.
Yes, further, further.
What kind of things. Then I would say... my brain is not working well today.
Okay, never mind. Anything you could think of. So, everyone will always say the same thing.
Something canned maybe.
Canned.
Basically everything that is highly processed somehow came to my mind.
That. And now imagine that what you are listing now, a long time ago, you serve to people who do not have what is in Africa.
Would they eat it or not?
Absolutely it would.
Would that save them from death?
Would.
Would. According to. We have to be realistic. We must not set limits, myths, be spoiled with some things.
The first thing that we all need to understand is that we can absolutely eat ourselves. Our body can break down almost everything.
It's not a myth, it's the truth.
It's true. Your organism does not distinguish whether something is produced organically or something produced is processed, as you say.
Cans. What's wrong with cans.
The most expensive cans that can be bought in Portugal and Spain are already ready made for some expensive meals, for some expensive restaurants.
They preserve absolutely everything there.
In, say, fermented products.
In, say, fermented products that are sold around Japan, that are sold in South Korea.
This is all done so that such food arrives safely as soon as possible and that nothing happens to it, that we have no spoilage, that we have no contamination on the table.
I mean, people really think in a way that is more imputed from what they hear all the time, rather than thinking logically about what is actually being talked about.
Or chips. Chips can be anything. The biggest problem for me is the salt on chips. Salt.
But eat a potato, and in the end a plain boiled potato, they say it's healthy, so of course it's healthy, but it's pure starch.
You have people who avoid any carbohydrates. They run away from carbohydrates, yes, I don't see a body, no potatoes, no beans, no bread, no nothing.
What will it feed its body with, that is, another organism that lives inside us and about which we may talk about something.
First, I think that the food that is put on the table and that could be acceptable to everyone according to all principles, and let's call it light, easy to digest,
very easy to prepare and not expensive. It's cheap food, it doesn't have to be expensive, it doesn't have to be a huge amount,
something exotic on the food to be declared healthy. One spoonful of something, let's say fatty oil, is enough, if it is already so expensive,
but the code says that all other things cannot contribute to us getting good fats. So, for every oil when you look at sunflower oil, it has an acid in it that reduces the signals
in our body that don't allow you to feel full. So, if you use sunflower oil or sunflower seeds, you will reduce the level of excessive leptin circulating in your body,
which is generated in fat cells. And then you can more easily recognize the feeling of satiety and stop eating. Likewise, you can get one thing if you eat meat from ungulates.
I won't name it now, but we don't have to, or when they say don't eat meat. You know the meat from ungulates, it has the characteristic of being able to improve the feeling of satiety. Don't eat pork. Why? It has a lot of carnitine. They buy carnitine in the pharmacy or in the gyms in order to get that combination of a couple of proteins, a couple of amino acids to strengthen muscle readiness,
better oxidation of fat. It's in pork. Proteins are also the easiest to digest in chicken. Common trout, the best food for redfish. Is she expensive? It's not. And let's not talk about sardines, about anything. These are things that don't have to be expensive. Canned sardines are a great product because you get everything in one. Not everyone likes them. I know that it is more or less overfed.
I know that it is more or less the diet of the coastal part of Croatia. And when you ask children in our continental part of Croatia if they eat fish, yes, yes, and when, tuna on pizza. Here, that's all they know about fish. So you simply need to be what one would say with your feet on the floor and closely follow the logic of the usage. We are all intelligent enough and very capable.
We are all intelligent enough and very capable.
How does that look practically in your life, for example? What is your routine when eating?
I am very careful not to overdo anything. So if I overdo it with work, if I'm really thinking about some big job, concentrating on what I still have to do, whether I'll get there or not, I immediately recognize it as soon as I wake up in the morning. Because I don't, but that's very rare.
I'm hungry every couple of years. I don't feel hungry in the morning when I wake up. And otherwise, when I'm okay, I'm hungry, even if I have a flight at five in the morning, I'll make myself a good breakfast. So, breakfast is something that I, I am a breakfast addict, could say before starting the day.
However, not all people, that is also true, would mention it there. A study was done where it was shown that only one quarter,
that only three quarters of people depend on this entry of glucose directly into the blood or the entry of food into our digestive system in the morning. People can function perfectly well, 25% of them, one quarter, so at four o'clock one of them can drink coffee, can drink tea, go to work and his first meal is somewhere around 11, what in the western world they call brunch, what they call brunch or what do they call, let's say,
lunch in the canteen when you work in a company, 11.30-12.00. So I recognize this in myself, if I'm healthy, I like to prepare something the night before or something, just so I don't be the neighbor's, because I have a very noisy mixer, but it's excellent and it's the best breakfast for me because I can put the whatever is at hand,
and even better if possible.
I recommend the small garden of 50 square meters, which is the Maksimir city garden, to everyone. What I have in the garden is some small fruit that I have or pine trees that can be cheap now, they cannot be bought, they are of good quality, one banana, a little milk or whatever liquid I have, and for me it is a great start to the day.
I like to drink coffee, I drink Turkish coffee and that's the only coffee I drink in the morning...
Coffee I drink during the day, but then I drink teas, various teas, for lunch, like today I didn't have lunch, but I ate more fruits that you I bring to work and I know how to bring some kind of breadsticks or something that I make myself or I buy such breadsticks that I buy with...
I make sure that they are really good quality breadsticks made from good flour...
Good quality with some cheese, but that's only for a moment I can also make that dinner in the afternoon, let's say something like soup, I cook, I very often make these soups, these soup dishes, I cook, sauerkraut is now seasonal in every way, sauerkraut, then I like to eat fish and I have kefir in the evening, I make it myself and it's my last meal at the end.
And where are the chips?
No, but if I get chips, I will eat them, but I make sure that I have some kind of, if it is, some kind of snow or chips as such, if I want to eat them, why not, then I make sure that there is no salt in them.
And why would salt be problematic, for example?
Salt is very problematic.
That.
It is, because salt itself is sodium chloride.
And we have different types of salt, that's true.
Each type of salt corresponds to a certain type of dish, that's true.
But sodium raises the pressure a lot and that is not necessary for a person.
Because sodium is the main external cation and it really disturbs the relationship between things, physical relationship, physics, electrochemical potentials, it is bad for the kidneys.
Why destroy the kidneys with salt?
And the danger is not in the salt you add, the danger is in the fact that they are products and you feel that the chips are salty.
Have you ever felt that bread is salty?
Not.
Equal to salt, bread can have one gram of salt.
And we should not take more than four, six grams of salt a day.
And in Croatia, there was a tendency to take 12-13.
12 grams of salt per day.
What is really a big danger is that amount of sodium chloride that enters our body,
it is not something that can be good and beneficial for the body in the long term.
Because as we said, life is cumulative.
Minor damage may occur, minor bleeding may occur due to rupture of certain capillaries.
It's not.
It is not necessary.
So salt should really be used with kum grano sale.
Salt as salt.
Better to take that expensive flower of salt.
M is expensive for you, so you don't want to spend a lot.
You only add M to the finished dish.
Then everyone just adds as much as they want and it's never too salty because it has a lot of minerals in it and hydration.
Right now, we are returning to those conflicting opinions and putting nutrition in the headlines.
Sincerely.
I have never gone deeper into the analysis of who this person is.
Some doctor, James, something like that.
And often his posts pop up on Instagram.
And he actually had a post a few days ago on the subject of salt and sugar.
And he actually prefers salt more than he prefers sugar.
Now I would say total nonsense if I went to explain it now.
Yes Yes Yes.
That's all I have left.
Periphery.
Peripheral memory as someone.
That salt is a better food than sugar, for example.
What is your general opinion about sugar?
We can continue now.
I think that salt, sugar, flour and some other food would belong to the four white deaths.
Fat.
Grease, yes.
Salt, sugar, flour, fat.
What is your opinion on sugar?
And we need one, two, three and four.
You need everything.
You need it.
Of course it needs some salt.
To take.
I mean, but we also get it through firs and other foods.
Why is it necessary to take salt sometimes?
Well, that's why it's salt, if it's from the sea, it has iodine in it.
And iodine is necessary in very small quantities for good thyroid function.
A person quickly notices when his thyroid is not functioning properly.
Or it works too fast, that is, it wears out, it secretes too many hormones, so you have hyperthyroidism.
Or it is inactive, hypothyroidism.
Hypothyroidism, a lack of these thyroid hormones that can occur.
Goitre is known, it used to be there on our windows.
Because the rock salt used for eating was not iodized.
And then with iodization, now all rock salt is iodized.
Perhaps too much iodine is now being introduced into the body.
One never thinks about that when one sees how great the increase in thyroid problems is.
It can also be one of the things.
Things that should be explored and documented a bit through arguments and scientific research.
So it is when it comes to salt.
We need it because of iodine.
And on the other hand, sugar, I don't think we need sucrose at all.
By sucrose I mean white sugar.
It's something made of glucose and fructose.
It means a refined 100% product.
100% refined product.
Refined in what way?
Because until the discovery of America and the arrival of, let's say, procedures that actually started using sucrose from sugar cane
and then sugar beets started to be used and grown and so on, no one had sugar.
They ate mostly honey.
Honey was the only sweetener.
I also think that our organism is adapted.
I claim that responsibly.
Bio chemically speaking.
So you have glucose and you have fructose.
Both, you don't know which is the better monosaccharide, the better carbohydrate, the simple carbohydrate glucose.
You need it to enter the blood, release insulin, it will enter the cell, the cell will be nourished, especially brain cells.
If it is in excess, it will be stored in reserve sugars in the liver.
And then they will enter the apartment.
You have about 600 grams in your liver.
And in the muscles.
Get into the muscles, you will get muscle tone.
Proteins don't give muscle tone, but glycogen does.
Reserve polysaccharide.
And now that fructose.
Which comes with that glucose.
So this fructose enters our body otherwise we call it fruit sugar.
It is found in its fruit and is found in honey.
An exclusively natural product.
Monosaccharide.
Because of that fructose, it is actually the sweetest.
She is very sweet.
Our fruit is the sweetest.
But the capacity of our body to break down that fructose in an appropriate way.
So that it enters the path of glucose breakdown.
It is limited.
Because we are not made for a unit of sugar.
Which has glucose and fructose.
Primordial man.
Let's think about him again.
And when we eat glucose, fructose, sweet sugar.
Let's say table sugar.
Let's call it that.
Whether it's white or brown.
The only difference is that brown sugar has molasses in it.
And it will not cause additional boils in the intestines.
He's kind of, I won't say dirty, but he has that molasses in him.
Refined sugar.
Refined white sugar.
Regardless of one or the other.
When you eat it, it won't break down in your mouth.
Kruk begins to break down in the mouth.
It mixes with saliva.
There is amylase, ptyalin.
Then it continues to be broken down further in the small intestine.
Because that's where the enzyme is located that will further break down kruk, for example.
It comes from the pancreas, another amylase.
And it all somehow works.
That is why man is adapted.
Or 50, 60 or more such units of carbohydrates.
Or the amount of carbohydrates.
It was normal for a man to eat once.
Until he became a hunter himself.
Then he ate a lot more protein.
And that's why the brain developed.
Let's go back to sucrose.
Sucrose will begin to break down in the mouth.
None of the sugar is broken down in the stomach.
This is a very acidic pH.
It is not broken down by enzymes.
It goes on.
It comes a little beyond the duodenum.
Towards the small intestine.
This is also where enzymes are secreted from the intestines.
Which are called disaccharides.
These are disaccharidazim enzymes.
So they split two sugar molecules.
Which are expensive.
There are four of the most important ones.
One is the other.
Maltase, isomaltase associated with starch.
They will break down the starch.
They have starch.
It must be present from birth, because a child who sucks on mother's milk
has the most lactose, the milk sugar, in mother's milk.
And the third is that sucrase.
Sucrase, break down sucrose.
Its capacity is also limited.
It needs to break down glucose and fructose.
If there is a little, everything will be fine.
Substrate flow.
If there is too much, it goes further into the intestines, undigested,
causing secondary boils and fermentations.
And if it stimulates, for example, the formation of compounds that are unsexy for the microbiota,
if the excess fructose is broken down,
very often it cannot be transported well in the intestines
or when it enters the blood and then it should be broken down into the path of breaking down glucose,
it doesn't work that way because part of it then it turns into precursors for fat synthesis.
I'm a little lost from all this sugar.
Good.
A bunch of these chemical names.
Maybe you can shorten it in the podcast, but I wanted to explain it to you.
It seems to me that it is quite important.
Maybe someone managed to follow.
I'm tired, I'm alone, people may not know, I met you this morning,
I graduated high school as a pharmaceutical technician.
Then yes.
I always...
The teacher tortured me on the board with chemistry assignments.
Maybe that's one of the reasons why I didn't decide to go to college for pharmacy.
I will ask you the next question, actually a continuation on the subject of sugars.
I did not understand.
In general, this sugar that we buy, that we can find in stores,
is not good for us and you think that there is no need to use it in our diet?
Very. Very little.
And I didn't understand about fructose.
Let's say, these fruits are fruit sugars.
As much as we get it through fruit and it is used a lot in the diabetic diet,
it can probably be broken down.
But if you take large amounts of sugar, now you take any drink, any drink,
and even the one that says we won't add large amounts of sugar,
but there is a lot of sugar inside.
Sugar, if it's sweet.
And people drink 4-5 such drinks or juices a day.
They get automatically large amounts of sugar.
The problem is the hidden sugar.
If you eat a cake, there is always sugar in it.
It's the same.
So a large amount of fruit is also not good for the body?
A large amount of fruit has fructose in it.
Good.
But also with a large amount of fruit, you need
to pay attention to what a large amount of fruit means.
Maybe some people can break down such fruits without problems.
You can express problems with other people.
It is not necessary to be exclusive in the sense of a certain diet,
but combinations must be made.
I think sugar, in general, whether it's store-bought sugar,
you see how much you put in there.
The simplest example, you drink tea, don't have it,
no sugar.
You drink coffee, they don't have sugar.
And done. You have already done a lot there.
When it comes to salt, watch how much salty bakery products you eat.
I won't say don't eat bread.
Eat bread, but eat that bread thinking rationally
and try to eat bread that you have left or that has been standing for a day,
because then saliva penetrates into it much more easily and it
breaks down much more easily than when you have fresh, warm bread from the bakery.
So then I ask my students, they come to class at 8:30 in the morning,
they eat some kind of pastry, I ask: "and what did we say, how much should be chewed,
how long should it be kept in the mouth so that the saliva mixes,
for the enzyme to come, for it to start splitting, so that it doesn't fall on your stomach?"
Quote:
"Professor, it takes two seconds."
It takes two seconds.
Tam, tam, tam, one bite, swallow and done.
That's not how it works, I don't think.
You have to watch out for these things.
Because fresh bread is wet by itself.
And because of that, it will be more difficult for the laza to penetrate into it.
And when you eat that toast, that bread or crackers or grisini or whatever,
then you have to work a little more
with your teeth, chew, chop and then you have the feeling of bread.
And when you eat fresh like this, only you,
the appetite is whetted just at the sight and the part that smells.
And then when it enters the mouth, it disappears.
Apart from the problem of salt in bread,
let's go to the third white death.
Flour.
Well, I mean, flour is made from grains.
She would not say that flour can be compared to
sugar or salt.
Of all that, I think the flour is really, I mean, if you can.
Why do they say it is death?
Because they say they are empty carbohydrates.
Empty, because they don't have vitamins in them, they don't have minerals in them,
because the grain has been completely polished, everything that is brown has been removed.
They were removed, like what a person doesn't like when he sees flour,
that the flour is a little dark when you have integral.
There wouldn't be any kind of mineral flour when you have flour made with bran
or made from some grains that, like barley,
like oat flour, heather flour, that's dark flour.
I don't have to talk about it much because when you talk about Istria
or about Istria in general, whoever you ask in Istria,
from the older generation, let's say my mom and that generation, they bear fruit.
White bread.
Because they didn't have it when they were children.
They had only dark bread.
They had what is called integral bread.
They bought that flour, which was never white, never refined.
Even today, when they can buy white bread, even in various forms,
komala, those pomades that you can eat, those rolls or roščiće,
as it is called in Istria, they are overjoyed.
It goes there.
But they compensate it with other food.
Let's close this part with fats.
So everything here would refer to saturated fats.
White mass, saturated mass.
People grew up on fat.
I always have a jar or packet of lard in the fridge.
Always.
Because if I make any in Istria, I know that šugo, goulash,
there is nothing better than mixing a little olive oil with fat.
Pork fat.
Yes, pork fat has a special noise, and on the other hand, pork fat does not oxidize very easily.
But I mean, what's the harm in doing it once? Nothing.
Adults are on lard.
They grew up both in continental Istria and in continental Croatia.
On the mountains.
For the most part, fat was always eaten, with a little paprika and more salt.
The bread was not salty enough.
Where better to wash than paprika and fat, bread?
And paprika is there to metabolize it all even better.
It still brought a biologically active substance, that capsaicin.
And he makes you feel good.
Because it ignites these endings in the mouth and that sends a signal to the brain.
And the brain then reacts as if some nox, some injury has appeared there and releases endorphins, endogenous opiates.
That's why Mexicans always smile.
That was a myth because they use a lot of pepper in their diet, which has this capsaicin in it.
And I think Hungarians are too, that's right, right?
Happy people.
Maybe Hungarians do the same because of palinka, it's not just work.
Okay, I won't get into that, but I love their peppers just the same.
Is.
Really.
This one was really interesting to me.
I think I mentioned on the last podcast.
My father is from Bosnia and Herzegovina, from Limno.
That.
From a small town for Gorićan and next to Limno.
As a child, he and his brothers and sisters plus his father had that summer mowing.
To prepare shade for the cattle for autumn and winter, etc.
I too, my grandfather was, he is no longer alive, always had this philosophical attitude.
Like me.
He acted like me, Vinko the same.
And he told me what they ate in those days when they mowed all day long.
They ate bacon and sugar.
Why did they eat bacon and sugar?
Because bacon first gives you long-lasting energy, right?
And sugar gives you energy quickly.
Fast energy, that's right.
And they didn't think, sugar is healthy, bacon is healthy.
They had tasks to do and so they adapted.
Well, I remember, you're absolutely right, my nephew, apparently he didn't have sugar when he was a child.
So he was born in the eyes of the First World War and was, unfortunately, no longer with us.
But a lot has passed.
It's his favorite dish, but you Slavonians surely know that because it wasn't eaten much in Istria, or to make pasta sauce.
Pasta, what do you call it?
Pasta in Dalmatia is called Manistra.
It means regular paste, grind almonds on that paste and add a little sugar.
And in Slavonia, they eat poppy seeds or walnuts and things like that.
It was exotic for him. He obviously learned and saw it somewhere, either under the influence of Austria-Hungary or the god of what he was for a while.
During the war in the camps, who knows where he saw it. Basically, he loved it. The man walked a lot, the man also ate other things. A bitter vegetable, he ate peaches that grow in Istria.
What are peaches?
Peaches are a special kind of kale, something like rastika, but they are most similar to those small chimuli. If you know the chimuli that are sold, they are very soft.
They are like the road. It's kale, it's heady, but it's very soft and grows all winter. And he is very generous.
Like kale or rastika, it is also made on olive mud with a little garlic. Sometimes you put a piece of bacon inside and then again inside some pasta or gnocchi that you make. It's great.
I would like to dwell on this topic a little longer.
I would go to this universally popular, I think you say, microbiome or microbiota. But before that, I talked with a couple of guests about it when we talk about food, about eating in restaurants.
Or about feeding through this delivery from the restaurant, etc. And now I'll leave it to you, all this that we gathered through sugars, flour, fats and all those excessive perhaps spices, it
seems to me that this is perhaps the basic problem of that restaurant food.
It depends, I wouldn't say. It depends on the restaurant. I am very glad that we now have the opportunity. So many new entrepreneurs came. We have Thai cuisine, we have Korean, we have Indian, etc. You don't have to order, for that matter, just some kind of lasagna or jars.
I think that I deal with it a lot, I deal with it because of my interest. I like to go among the chefs. I even have a sanitary certificate for working as an assistant cook. That is one of my achievements. They were very happy. And I can renew it and that's all right. But I like working with chefs and I see that they are very conscious of what they do, how they do it.
They are now trying to really use what was once considered to be thrown away. Now, for example, they are used if they peel some food or sweet potato or burdock, then it will dehydrate, they have that option. It will put the same on the menu or it will be because of the presentation. I don't think that restaurant food or canteen food has to be the least bit bad.
I really helped in the whole project to design for some people, not to mention companies, my former company, etc. How to design food in a restaurant. Just that, it was a hobby for me, I was interested in it, it was nice for me and people were satisfied. That is very good.
And there's a lot to be had, if you think a little, and if you have a good cook, and a very large number of our cooks are really excellent.
They are well educated, they are excellent, if they are motivated, young people. They start working very early. They think a lot about what they put on their plate and how to throw away as little of it as possible, what they call calo, something that gets in the way.
So it doesn't have to be, she wouldn't say that we eat badly if we eat in canteens or if we order. You just have to be smart with that order. And if you order something like that,
malazanje, then with it a big bowl of homemade sarate or pickles or ajvar, it's all fermented and good.
I learned about the term orthorexia from guest Anđela Jelić.
That.
And then I was, and now when you talk, you give me some nice feelings in the way that maybe I don't need to philosophize too much about food.
That a large number of foods is necessary, that our body can digest it, that it can use it, that we should think about eating more lightly, that we do not exaggerate the amount and that all foods are good, that we should even eat as varied as possible.
Well, obviously that aspect of eating is also very important, that we enjoy what we eat.
I mean, food is fuel for us, but I mean.
If you think when you go to the gas station whether you will put this type of gasoline or whether you will put diesel or whether you will put another one, that means you carefully monitor what you will put in your engine before you leave, then you should think a little about what you will put inside.
I think the main principle is that the food doesn't stay long in your stomach, that the food simply passes through the digestive tract quickly.
You allow your digestive tape.
You allow your digestive tract to rest.
I am not at all unfamiliar with fasting and occasional fasting if people eat in that way.
If they eat a lot, you occasionally feel the need not to eat.
That's perfectly fine.
That it was introduced is through various religions.
I think that there is actually a physiological basis for it.
That those who thought about it, wrote those rules and knew it.
Yes before the big eating seasons.
Or on big days, holidays.
One fast is being carried out.
Eat maybe half as much as usual.
Or even less.
If only on Fridays or, it doesn't have to be Friday.
One day a week.
Ate half as much as usual.
You gradually lose each month.
At least 300 to 400 excess fat.
That gets lost quickly.
Every month.
Let's say.
One kilogram of fat to lose by walking.
You can walk 212 kilometers.
This is your one day a week.
You close your mouth and it's easier.
Half as much.
I mean, it's not a problem.
I mean, I also have a problem with unwanted fat on some parts of my body.
Because sometimes or during the summer I relax too much.
It's true.
It is Istria.
Today it is no longer the poor Istria from my childhood.
Or I'm not as active as I was when I was in high school.
And now when you take it.
All that together in consideration.
And let's say my habits now.
And the availability of that food, which is now very good.
Fine.
Availability of as much oil as you want.
It's not like it used to be when it was one or two teaspoons.
Now you can put oil on everything.
And oil is fat.
It's not easy to lose 7000.
200 kilocalories, how much you need to lose for one kilo of fat.
And one kilo of fat is very easy to gain.
And mostly through sugars in cakes and desserts.
And worst of all, I resist it so much.
I consciously do not want to have these things in the house.
But when they are small cookies, fine things, each one is different.
And each one tastes great.
I mean, you have to look.
Stand on the scale before, stand on the scale after.
It's not a matter of you getting sick from it now.
But as I said.
Today you wake up and the next day you have maybe half a kilo more, so you don't worry about it.
But in a year, these are accumulated kilograms that you will have a hard time shedding.
And unnecessary.
To you young people who are in full swing.
Who is now raising that family.
That doesn't have to be a problem.
But just think about what an extra molecule is.
Unnecessary for that organism.
Why would she cause you additional inflammation now.
Why would it harm the wall of your blood vessels in some way.
And there the platelets will begin to stick together immediately.
That is, blood-clotting cells.
That's where those big fat deposits that can't pass nicely will meet.
Why would someone who is 40 even have one.
Atherosclerosis.
You don't need to have it.
It is not necessary.
And now we come to that.
A generally popular part.
I do not know.
I will ask you.
Why has the gut microbiome become such a trendy thing lately?
That.
Why are we talking about him so much?
Well, thank God that he became.
And that we met him.
First of all.
It is actually our new organ.
Because it is transplanted with the intestinal microbiome.
From one person to another.
So if we treat something that way.
It is our organ.
We will probably never standardize it.
Such an intervention.
And it is unlikely that any permission will ever be given.
Although ethics committee permits for such things are given.
For those patients who really cannot regenerate their intestines at all.
Because they had some terrible infection with some kind of bacteria.
Such as Clostridium difficile.
From which it occurs in some patients.
On long-term therapy, antibiotics, etc.
In some people.
Simple when you apply that hellish transplant.
Transplantation of the intestinal microbiome.
For a reason, the healing rate is over 96%.
That is enormously good.
I mean, I'm not a doctor.
But we did projects.
I met with numerous gastroenterologists.
This was also done in Croatia.
I mean also in Austria, in Vienna.
I met these people.
It is our organ.
It's another thing.
It's something new.
And then it's always very interesting in science.
Because as I said.
We couldn't know what it was before.
What is actually a setup.
What bacteria are these?
They could not be bred.
You couldn't breed.
In the nose or so on when you are sick.
Now we know what we have inside.
Because there are tools.
There are methods of molecular biology.
There are very good sophisticated devices.
And after that bioinformaticians look at it.
And they put them in certain groups.
Unions, intersections, etc.
We now know what actually.
What we are dealing with.
At least we got to know part of it.
It is interesting that many things can influence.
A hundred many things can affect the composition of those bacteria that live in our mucous membranes.
Now specifically in the intestines.
And that's the colon.
We are talking now about the large intestine most often.
We have the highest number of these bacteria there.
The number of them also changes a lot.
At the beginning, when we started talking about them,
we said that there are ten times more of them than there are cells of our adult organism.
So eukaryotic cells are multi-cellular organisms.
They are prokaryotes.
Basically everyone, as I said, lives without oxygen.
In these anaerobic conditions.
But in anaerobic conditions, life began.
And now we know that there are about 60% of them,
and ours stands at 40%.
So they are one and a half times more,
not ten times more.
Let's say an adult healthy person
may be impaired, but if the person is sick,
it may be less.
The more numerous they are,
the more diverse they are
and the more they are actually formed
by the gathering of related
bacteria
.
Let's call them good bacteria,
the healthier you are.
If they arose,
our microbiome developed
by gathering bad bacteria,
pathogenic bacteria,
they unfortunately prevail.
Because they gather similar ones,
they create conditions for
bacteria similar to them to
grow and propagate around them.
Bacteria are like people.
So the good is
attracted to the good, the lesser
is attracted to the good, and the good is attracted
to the one that suits him.
Accordingly, our goal
and everyone's goal should be
that from the beginning,
when the microbiome begins to form,
and they say that it is formed
and there is evidence already in the mother's womb,
but it is a very weak microbiome.
The microbiome is best formed
if the birth is natural
through the vaginal canal
, i.e. the birth canal,
where the child has
the first contact
before coming
to the outside world,
to the environment,
where air dominates
and water flows,
in fact it receives
on all its mucous membranes
from the mouth, eyes, nose ,
the whole skin,
receive what lives
and is healthy
in the mother's womb.
And these are the bacteria of milk fermentation,
which are mainly
lactobacilli
, and then you don't need
to think too much
that the child will really
have it right
in the beginning, that center
of crystallization, the eye,
I call it that symbolically,
around which good bacteria
will begin to stick,
because the good bacteria will actually
be sown
on his mucous membranes.
Unfortunately, it has been seen
that when the delivery is
via caesarean section
and especially if
antibiotics are used immediately
afterwards , this does not happen
and indeed the microbiome
in the dieter is then more difficult to establish.
So doctors,
gynecologists,
doctors who work
in maternity hospitals,
started thinking
about ways to create
and compensate for the intestinal microbiome, that
is, good bacteria,
which is no longer intestinal,
but the microbiome
of the genital tract, which should
actually settle
in that small child,
in his digestive tract. tract
and on all mucous membranes.
So that they know how to do
such interventions,
it was published,
that some doctors,
that's what we were told by students
who went to practice,
that is, doctoral students
in Namaskar Austria,
had the experience
that the doctors there simply knew
with the hand that was,
that is, with with the glove
they used to examine,
he just smears that child
as soon as it comes out of the placenta,
that he got that microbiome,
and even the best intervention is
to put
some kind of vaginal swabs,
that is, put some kind of,
let's say we used to have
an expression at school when we wrote
in bugačica what absorbs well,
they are placed in the vaginal canal of the woman
and this gas spreads around the child,
as soon as the child is removed
from the placenta,
i.e. when a caesarean section is performed.
I don't know what those terms are now,
I'm not a doctor,
but Dominique Gell
did it in New York
and she has very good results,
and then gynecologists
who respect the existence of the microbiome
for fertility and
for the cervix
and for other things,
said that very often it does not take
more than a month or two to establish
the normal microbiome of a child,
if it is not populated
by aerobes, bacteria that live
with the help of oxygen,
which in fact came
from the environment
that was around that child,
around that child when it was
put out on the air for the first time.
So that's it.
What should the average person
know about
this aspect
of the microbiome anyway?
How would she behave?
To be aware that it exists.
That it's not just us
superior
homo sapiens,
but that we have bacteria,
archaea, that we have parasites,
that we have super fungi
that can help us a lot.
All those microorganisms that live
on our mucous membranes and in us,
they are there with the purpose
of being the ones who will
digest those things from our food
that we cannot digest.
We talk about polyphenols,
we talk about resveratrol
from wine,
we talk about grapes,
we won't mention wine, but
we are grapes, red,
berries, lots of pigments.
We cannot block it.
We don't know how to block it.
We are not able to break it down.
Such compounds and resveratrol
are absorbed through the mucous membrane
of our intestine into the blood
4%.
4%. It's nothing.
Its bioavailability is nothing.
And these bacteria, they
basically
consume non-degradable parts
of starch, say what remains
from boiled potatoes,
which has not been broken down,
then they consume inulin,
either from chicory,
either from the others,
from some of the foods
he has like chicory.
So, these are polysaccharides
that we don't break down properly,
we don't have enzymes for them, they break them down.
And they then
turn it
into small compounds
that can enter our circulation
and actually control
our entire metabolism.
When you say
that you have problems
with, say, veins,
that you have problems with the thyroid gland,
that you have problems with some
other organs
or, say, with the urogenital tract,
first check
if your intestines are
in order,
if by any chance you have
a leaky intestine somewhere
where the cells break through
our mucous membranes,
they open and then
the contents of the intestines leak into the blood.
These are pure bacteria,
they are not good bacteria,
but they are parts of certain bacteria,
it is called lipopolysaccharide,
the envelope of bacteria,
which are very suitable
for the occurrence of inflammation
in that part.
Unnecessarily.
So we should always act
in such a way that we have bacteria
that can create
and live in that mucous membrane,
but in such a way
that they live in mucus.
A healthy intestine is one
that has 4 to 6 mm of mucus between the lumen,
the bad part,
I mean the waste products in the intestine
and the cells of the intestine
.
And if that mucus exists,
then you
also have an easier bowel movement, we
are all aware of that,
you have a much healthier
mucosa,
because the bacteria
that should remain in the lumen
remain, they don't get into the blood,
you don't have
any kind of hypoxic,
unwanted conditions
on the other hand the side of the intestine,
where you have a small inflammation that is constantly simmering
, you are not even aware that you have it,
and then it flares up all of a sudden.
Those cells
of our intestine, for example,
have not reached their final division.
Some cells in our organism,
once created,
will not divide again.
The liver can regenerate
, it divides the kidney, it can be
removed, the other kidney will proliferate.
So they have announcements,
some more divisions further on.
But in the intestines,
these cells regenerate non-stop.
They have
a high turnover.
I still haven't understood
what we can practically do.
Well, what can we do?
We can also do that to be
aware that we have such
organisms and to give them that food
the way they want to have it.
That we do not use
antibiotics unnecessarily
because they will kill good bacteria
and bad bacteria.
We use too many antibiotics.
That we do not use
substances that can be toxic
for you. These are, for example,
these additives
or certain preservatives.
Not canned.
Canned foods not to be eaten.
Food does not spoil, such as nitrites.
They can also cause
problems in this, but that is only one
aspect and the other is much more complex.
And that we have as much
fiber as possible in our diet
.
They say at least 23 grams
of fiber per day should be
eaten. And fibers can be
soluble in water,
like an apple, then it swells.
Or insoluble in water like apple peel,
that's cellulose. It serves
as food for them.
And it will also help in the good formation
of the chair at the end.
We may ask
a difficult question.
If you could try
to convey to the viewers in one word
what they can do
to make the silver microbiota
quality
and healthy, whatever.
One word, what would you say?
Living is simple
in such a way that
you intervene as little as possible
from the outside
with undesirable
factors.
So, to eat
as we said.
Relatively
moderate, never overeat
, give them
substrate gradually, I can't solve one thing.
They are very dependent on the diurnal
rhythm, so sleep is important,
because the microbiome monitors it.
I won't talk now,
no one can choose how they will
actually be born,
in what way, nor can they
choose whether or not they will have the possibility
of supplementary feeding or
something in early childhood,
but a dream,
food and movement have shown me
.
Because
physical activity is extremely
important for athletes, it helps a lot
in the health of the microbiome.
Not overtraining, but physical
activity.
They are not, it seems
like a cliché,
eat healthy, move
and you have to
make sure that you have
a certain
sleep hygiene.
If you can.
These are the parts
of the lifestyle that we mentioned at the beginning.
Yes, I didn't have
one big part of my life.
I mean, I felt really...
It was a waste of time for me
to sleep.
I wrote at night, that's a lot.
And then I saw
that maybe only if I change that
I can endure a lot more
and be
a lot easier on myself
and that is much better now.
So we just really need to behave
the way everyone taught us.
Sleep, move,
eat moderately,
eat a variety,
don't complicate life.
But Vinko's body teaches you that.
We all know that,
most likely, but now we are trying to figure out
how to realize it all.
But that's what your body teaches you. Start one day just
like that,
and where you can say no, say no,
tell yourself no, I don't want this.
I don't want that, but I want this, I want that.
Treat yourself, enjoy,
breathe
and done.
Are
probiotics a scam?
That,
you see, is a question that
is very difficult to say now, it's
like I'm shooting myself in the foot.
Because whenever someone
in the family takes an antibiotic,
I immediately say did you take
probiotics, did you take probiotics.
And at the end of the day,
I take probiotics myself through the kefir
I make for myself. I also add
fungi in there, because
kefir fungi are fungi, and
secondary fermentation produces
lactobacilli from that
milk, the ones that are present there
while it is in the fridge.
I think
they are absolutely not a scam.
The concept is
completely,
completely
grounded. It was
also founded by Mečnikov. He
was a Russian doctor.
Which one is it, he won
an award, I think,
for medicine. In fact, he
constantly advocated
the use of sour milk
in addition to that area
of ​​the west, say, the Balkans,
Georgia and things like that. And saw
that people lived longer there who
consumed such milk. And he lived
, mind you, at the turn of two centuries.
I think he died somewhere
after the first world war
in 1917-18.
He also
wrote that book "Prolongation of
life". And then it took many, many
years to actually
see that main
bacteria that is being talked about,
LGG, Lactobacillus,
which
actually comes to us today
in the form of probiotics.
It was only patented there in
the 70s and 80s
. That is a very
big period. And
we had a whole revolution
with the arrival of penicillin during
the Second World War, etc.
Of course antibiotics saved
the world from many diseases.
But they also violated
the homeostasis or
balance of the organism. Because
when they destroy all of
your intestinal flora and other flora,
it opens the way
for other bacteria to colonize there.
So probiotics
are not a scam,
but it is very important
from which manufacturer you buy,
that probiotic, does it
have a good track record, is
there any evidence, that some studies
have been done, what is the composition,
are you going to go
for only one strain or you will go
to more soy probiotics.
This is where my colleagues and I
often
disagree. I always
think that probiotics should be taken
gradually, increasing.
So I'm very much
against probiotics in powder,
because you can dose yourself
as much as you need, not in capsules
or open the capsule, and then
gradually come to a larger dose.
Because in the beginning,
even if you start with sauerkraut every day,
just that, every day is sauerkraut,
now an experiment is being done
with athletes. In the beginning
, while he is getting used
to it, you have the winds
and everything. Same with probiotics.
You don't have to, which means that they will
stick right to the walls
where they need to be. It means
feeding them gradually and all
the time. My thing
loves sauerkraut. Well, that's
a great thing. It was with us
when we were children,
dad always used
to cook on Saturdays, and then he
made sauerkraut. Well, those were the rituals
, they moved the whole floor upstairs.
Yes, because of
sulfur compounds. Mom's freaking out,
but he's been making sauerkraut all day.
That's it. Let, let.
Let, let.
I mentioned it when I was talking to Andrej Karačić
that sauerkraut is actually very important
for health as a tubular microbiome.
So I told you, you see how I
knew it. Even earlier.
We don't have kimchi, we don't have
kombucha, but we do have sauerkraut.
That's what I wanted to ask you now.
I don't know much about these
kombucha ingredients.
What do you really think
about kombucha and what do you think about other trends
in your lifestyle medicine?
And those aren't exactly, you know,
Vinko, when you look at it, they
aren't exactly trends, but rather
habits taken from people who
have consumed it
all their lives, and these are the people who
consume such
things today
, so-called blue
zones exist .
And it's very popular now because everyone
thinks that living
a long time is
great, a big deal.
Quality is important.
It is important to live
and not
exist for long.
So living long
does not necessarily imply that
the quality of life in a long life is good.
However, in the blue zones
, and especially like this,
you were, for example, heavily
tracked to Kinava,
which is an isolated island
where people,
when they were poor, mostly
ate salted fish
, and there were high incidences
of stomach ulcers
to intestinal denum and everything.
It used to be a great poverty
until the Americans freed them
. You remember
that in the war. They came
in that name, they liberated
Okinawa, that is, the great battle
from that island.
Even today, because of that isolation,
but also because of
the availability of food, they
used the best of
what is known from
the code diet and combined
it with their
traditional diet.
So the drinks they
use are made from teas
and from drinks that are created by the fermentation
action of certain mushrooms
or such
very large mushrooms
like kombucha that grows in teas
they are extremely rich
in all substances that are
necessary for the health of our
microbiome, i.e.
the microbiota of our bacteria ,
I'm talking about the bacteria of the microbiota
and it's
no myth, no trend,
that drink
is a non-alcoholic
drink with a very pleasant
taste. We can
replace it partly
the same as
you mentioned that you have the possibility
in Istria to get
local products
in the very place where you
have your small nest in Istria
or a big
nest, I don't know,
apple vinegar
or muscat vinegar
is produced there and those are
what you would said madre
or the stem part
they call madre, but you know they
speak that dialect as a joke
, i.e. in big vats,
what is it and
yeast fungi
have been present in them
for years in those vats,
they just fill it with the last
muscat that didn't work
for the production of muscat, so they put it there
to ferment until the end and they get
excellent nutmeg vinegar
and that's a great thing,
you basically get probiotics
and prebiotics
because you have leftover fibers
and you get the so-called
pozbiotics are small compounds
that these probiotic
yeasts and bacteria secrete
externally, and so in kombucha
you have such things
that we always talk about,
I'm happy that
one
is
sauerkraut
, i.e.
. onions
from South Korea, they eat it
for breakfast and in every meal,
it's a completely normal food for them,
I know from personal experience
because some members of my family
lived and studied there for months,
and the same
is true, I have that container,
how to do it, no problem,
it's a great thing
then I have the kefir
that I mentioned
and the fourth is the kombucha
and this is what great experts say at congresses
about microbiota
and nutrition,
Anglo-Saxon epidemiologists all
agreed that
it is very necessary for our health
. I wanted to
ask you something about super foods
or super foods, whether this
have you collected
, then it turned out to be super food
, or do you remember something else, maybe
Well, in my opinion, these are just a few
trends
, something called super food
in my opinion and in
the opinion of many people,
because I participated in the panels of people
who worked on personalized
nutrition
and for the European Commission
and for some others, which are national
and international bodies,
in fact
, it's about getting
a food that is complete
with as little
thermal processing
as possible or with as little
major preparation as possible, you get
everything you need in that one food,
and you know which is the best,
super food? egg
and you should not
run away from egg
those who do not consume food
of animal origin,
I respect that
and it is one of the best
hides for eggs, they
will get it through plants of course
and they know a lot more
about food and nutrition
those who are real vegans
maybe than me
because I know that I learn a lot from them
, but the egg is basically
everything that an organism needs
from an embryo to stand on its feet,
even get feathers,
get a beak
, get everything, everything
, and that one of them is
harmful in the diet
because of cholesterol
is actually untrue
and illogical.
they are harmful, again I would say it
depends on how for whom
, but eat two eggs a week
it won't harm anyone
, and you want
to get your needs met
in a small volume in a simple way
, and make sure you don't have sugar,
you have mostly fat
and protein in egg whites
, there is nothing better
if you need protein, remove the
yolk, eat more egg whites,
if you need fat,
and the lecithin
that you is important for
choline, everything like that
and
cholesterol, after all,
hormones
are synthesized from it, and
the lining of the brain
and our nervous system
is actually synthesized
from such
substances
. raštika
radish in Istria, you must have eaten
both green and red radishes
and all possible bitter radishes,
where are the truffles?
truffles are mushrooms
, they practically
have no taste,
they have almost no taste,
I'm sorry to say it,
but when you cut a fresh truffle,
it has no taste and smell,
it becomes tasty and fragrant
, and when you add butter or mask,
the aromatic compounds
in it,
that is, I will not say that are aromatic
, but they are not aromatic compounds
and I can't tell
because I don't know that,
but the compounds that release the aromas
when they dissolve
are obviously fat-soluble
and must be mixed with oil,
then it is best
or with butter,
but mushrooms are great food
only if they are not toxic,
no you know if animals are
humans, they are not
animals either, plants
are somewhat strange, mushrooms are
special, but they are special
only if they are not poisonous
, then your food is great,
someone says that
ginger or turmeric
are very good , they are spices
, but again, ginger should be careful
if a person has high blood pressure
you shouldn't really consume ginger,
it's good that
at least it's anti-vomiting
turmeric , now everything I'm saying now is
being taken again,
maybe in a few days
there may be something different turmeric,
now there are some stories about
how much and when and how to eat,
it's really good
to cram you have a lot of turmeric
, so consume it like this
with the other kind of
gi butter,
our butter that is fried
that is prepared
in a special way is simply prepared,
it is only sold at an expensive price
all over the world
and it is still used
because it is not rancid, it can never oxidize
and people make these for themselves balls
of turmeric, they put
cayenne pepper inside everything
, no need to joke, everything has to be
gradual, but let's say
what I am very happy,
I met a person who goes
around Africa and is looking,
actually, she is from
Sheffield, England,
a teacher,
she will be in Ghana for 6 months
and now he is currently looking for those
native plants that could be
super food and that could be useful to me
in the future,
they were the team that
brought chia seeds to our market,
they are excellent
and let's just say they are super food, chia seeds
for the moment
you can leave them over nights
are practical,
just put a spoon in your smoothie,
you also get protein
and those quality fats
from them, they have a little bit of
carbohydrates, but they have a lot of minerals,
super food will definitely
be algae very soon ,
for now we have algae that are mostly
grown or harvested
and then dried,
but it will be certainly algae
, and I think that great food is
all that we
can see around us
today when we come,
for example, to one of our plots
where most people
grow food
from your local gardens,
imagine peppers,
imagine a good tomato
or a good tomato,
good root vegetables,
especially sweet potatoes, are
super foods because you can
eat a lot of them, they don't raise your sugar level,
excellent things,
I imagined too much
in a hungrier family
, that usually always happens
when someone talks
by
yourself
or
anyone
who
listens
to one
of
my
lectures
.
_
_ are
very important to you
and that the audience will
enjoy it as much as I enjoyed it,
you and Andrija
actually helped me
to somehow
overcome my orthorexia,
I started philosophizing about food too much,
so
I realized that
we should eat more variety
, that food is not our enemy,
that it is everything necessary
for our organism
for our serial microbiome,
the same also
for the brain,
it is necessary for enjoyment,
because we eat
with our eyes
and we eat with our feelings,
that's what I learned from Anđela Jelić,
Anđela was with us as well
in the team
, thank you Donatela,
you 're welcome
every time
see you soon